i received a seemingly absurd
question from the audience and i'm going
to do the man who asked the question
and all of you in the audience the favor
of treating it quite seriously and not
dismissing it as observed and that
question is democracy
what really is the point what really
fundamentally is the advantage i'll read
his precise wording in just a moment but
let me let me steal man the question for
you this way
if we were to admit that a kingdom or a
despotism
is only as good as the cluster of men
who happen to be ruling at the top
wouldn't it be fair to suppose
that a democracy is only as good
as that cluster of men who are ruling be
they
at the bottom or the top or the middle
if what we're talking about
in government really is the goodness of
the people
who happen to comprise the government
and how well
those people can work together very
interesting criterion
what really would be the advantage of
democracy
what's the advantage of having a larger
number of people
in government which has some obvious
disadvantages and then also
if they're all terrible people anyway
you know would you rather have a
despotism
by a highly educated highly enlightened
highly erudite few or would you rather
have government by the many
if they are perhaps very poorly educated
or of particular
religious and social values made his
growth
let's make this a lot less impalpable
and talk about
afghanistan let's talk about even
indonesia
you know let's talk about egypt you know
how much
popular democracy do you want if you're
in a country
where the majority of people are
conservative muslims and where there is
perhaps
an erudite enlightened educated minority
who have more secular more modern more
pragmatic values
would you prefer to live in iran
if iran has democracy and they do today
they have a mixed or imperfect
democratic system but iran has elections
iran has freedom of the press
you know but you know who the people of
iran
tend to elect they tend to elect
governments that reflect their own
deeply conservative muslim values
and agenda right so it's very easy to
look then say oh
i personally would be more comfortable
living in iran if it happened to have a
dictatorship
or happen to have a monarchy that more
closely
resembled my own western secular
supposedly enlightened values hmm yes
how easy
this line of reasoning is very few
people really
think this stuff through rigorously
partly just because
every political persuasion left right
and center is forever
praising democracy you will find that
both communists and fascists
even when they criticize democracy will
very often turn around
and pretend or presuppose that their own
political agenda is leading to a more
perfect democracy a more authentic
democracy that they represent the true
democracy
even while they're screaming to tear
democracy down i've certainly heard
communists
with absolutely zero irony claim
that um in 1917
the leninists by killing all the people
who won the election were doing
something much more democratic than
allowing the people that
won the elections to rule because really
it's only the factory workers who have
should have the right to vote anyway
people deeply commit to different ideas
and ideals of democratic legitimacy
and they can more easily switch between
one ideal
than another then they can challenge the
fundamental preset positions of
democracy as such and ask
wait is it what what was this advantage
of democracy supposed to be
why is it that we suppose a democratic
society is the best kind of site all
right
the actual the actual wording of the
question i received from
maximilian was quote i would be
interested in knowing
what the benefits of and philosophical
basis for
quote unquote democratic decision making
would be
a close quote he then gives a whole list
of uh
sources that he's read that are
criticizing and cross-examining
democracy and expressing skepticism
about the rationality of
voter behavior and the viability of
democracy as
an ideal as such and he very vaguely
says to me that he's interested in
alternatives that are neither democracy
nor dictatorship but more market-based
solutions
so i assume that's some kind of
capitalist libertarian
ideal he's talking about i i genuinely i
genuinely can't
imagine okay the problem with your
approach
maximilian is that you are thinking of
government in terms of ruling
and you're not thinking of government in
terms of asking questions
in terms of active research and informed
opinion
and without insulting you maximilian you
probably do not have experience living
in
or studying or researching
non-democratic societies
and the normal course of government in
completely
non-democratic systems how that unfolds
how what is
that power operates where nobody can ask
questions where nobody can initiate new
forms of
research and inquiry uh within
government or by independent government
independent bodies using that research
inquiry frankly to
shame the government right i remember
reading a detailed account from
vietnam surreal to read about the
politics of vietnam
from their long hard unapologetic
communist period which i would say
basically hasn't ended
they still have a communist government
but with a capitalist economy
now and at one of these meetings
who were the senior military commanders
the generalissimos
in this dictatorship they sat down
this is an annual meeting where they had
a series of bullet points for discussion
and one of them was basically about
poverty
and the guy in charge of the meeting
remarked when he saw this on the agenda
of things they were going to discuss and
said oh this is the first time we've
discussed a social issue at one of these
meetings in
12 years someone had gone and looked
when was the last time we talked about
poverty or last time
one of these elite level meetings it's
in myanmar currently they're having
protests in the street
about whether or not they will have any
democracy but
just a few years ago i'm sorry i could
have googled this to get the date
correct but just a few years ago i was
following the politics of myanmar
as they made the transition from total
military dictatorship
to this kind of mixed managed system
where they they did have a parliament
and they did have some freedom of the
press and the parliament was able to ask
questions of the military tissue but but
by the way the military dictatorship
never really went away
it became a military dealership with
some some democracy and a sort of
parliament and one of the very first
parliamentary sessions
in this period of burmese history
somebody got up and started
asking questions about electricity
how much electricity was being generated
and where
and the military dictatorship had been
controlling the government for decades
basically they made a
transition from um a socialist system
to a military dictatorship that didn't
have the pretensions of socialism
but the socialist period also was
basically despotic one of a better term
from tyrannical socialism that right
military leadership so the decades and
decades and decades with no
no semblance of democracy whatsoever and
what they found was
nobody had the numbers nobody was doing
the math they did have power stations
generating electricity and of course
they had people complaining that there
wasn't enough
nobody had ever gotten out a map or oh
how much electricity are we generating
in each place and of course the obvious
question is that enough and who's
satisfied who's not and should there be
more power over here and less there and
where should we build the next
station and where do we need to build
more power lines there was
absolutely no questioning
now these examples are kind of easy
and if you stop and reflect on the
absence of questioning
in completely non-democratic
institutions within your own life
starts to become much more disturbing
hospitals are completely non-democratic
completely authoritarian institutions
universities are completely
non-democratic completely authoritarian
institutions
who's in charge here you're not allowed
to ask why is that guy in charge
nobody has to tell you why what were his
credentials how was he
selected given that he never was elected
who is he responsible to who is he
accountable to
what if nobody in the department of
chinese is actually learning chinese
what if the guy in charge of the
buddhist studies department is a drunk
or a drug addict not unprecedented
university professors become alcoholics
university professors become
drug addicts we had one guy in canada he
basically became a nazi
stated in power for many many years was
in the newspapers
spreading his so-called race realism for
decades it's ridiculous
um you know but they may not have been
at the time they were hired
right oh well there was a hiring
committee at one point
that decided this person should be a
professor but once they were anointed
once they were elevated to this level of
being a
university professor nobody is allowed
to question them nobody's allowed to
cross examine them and questions of
organization
questions of research and its
effectiveness and its outcomes
all right you really have to spend some
time
not just doing the research but living
with
universities and appreciating the loss
of human potential like what it is
that's being squandered there to realize
that
from my perspective at least the best
run
universities are something like the best
tyrannies the best run despotism in that
there's something terrible and tragic
being lost at all times
even when there's nothing in particular
going wrong now
on university campuses nobody starves to
death
right universities don't produce their
own
food yeah we don't run farms
the same way we run universities we
don't run
supermarkets the same way we run
universities
um however if you look at the finances
of any given university and you look at
it the university is a sort of miniature
society
dealing with just a few problems you
know it's very select and narrow way
so well they don't have to deal with
food they don't have to deal with
generating electricity
they don't have to deal with sewage
treatment they're providing running
water
all the university has to do is provide
a room with a chalkboard
and a man or a woman who holds the chalk
and stands there and gives a lecture
some chairs
right like the responsibilities of the
university really
very narrow and very limited indeed and
yet nevertheless
they're perpetually going bankrupt
they're perpetually demanding
more money from the government more
money from their own students
and in a very real sense when you run
the numbers they're bankrupting the
whole of society
i wish i could say to you that we have a
free capitalist democratic society that
produces so much
abundance that we can tolerate a kind of
despotism within our society
namely the university campus but we
can't
it's bankrupting us all it's not just
student debt
on an individual level it's making
beggars of the whole society
i remember reading an inquiry into
fraud in the american university system
who were the people who were basically
doing elaborate paperwork
to try to prove that their children were
more poor than they actually are
in order to get lower tuition in
university
and this included things like people
having their own servants adopt
their children can you imagine this in
the united states of america
wealthy people putting down on paper
that they are not the child
they are not the child's parent but
their their housekeeper their nanny
their mechanic their driver is legally
the child's parent having phony
adoptions
like this now what this report
discovered
or concluded is it is not the poor
who are defrauding the university system
this way
it's millionaires but it's people who
have just one million dollars their name
it's people have only a few million
dollars
to the name because if you have five
kids
and you are talking about university
tuition of minimum
fifty thousand dollars per year per
child and the real cost could be in the
united
if you are a states even if you are a
multi-millionaire
right this can bankrupt you this can
ruin you
and these are people some of them who
are willing to
engage in more or less elaborate fraud
to try to get their children
an education despite that so a democracy
can it tolerate in this sense a death
business
and let me ask you you know very simply
if a university were run on democratic
principles
for whom would it work who would it
serve
not the professors not this tiny elite
of the president of the university and a
small coterie of his
colleagues right if a university will
run on democratic principles it would
serve
the students and it would serve the
demands of society as a whole
now in the same way that the beginning
of this video i said to you there are
these very obvious fundamental questions
that just don't get asked in
non-democratic society and myanmar
nobody's allowed to ask about
electricity generation nobody's able to
debate these things and criticize the
government so on the questions don't get
asked
so the quality of government necessarily
is very very poor i would point out to
you
that all of the most important questions
in universities
cannot get asked right the university
wants to make
as much money as possible by giving as
many phds as possible to people in
history
canada 30 million people how many people
with phds in history can we possibly
employ how many dentists how many
engineers
when you just ask wait wait what's this
what's the strategy here
who decided how many resources would go
into teaching
each subject and how many seats there
would be like how many places there
would be for students
in each area of expertise and
specialization
guess what for the whole of the united
states and canada
the western european democracies there
is no plan
right this was handed over to a
self-serving
non-democratic elite to pursue their own
self-interest to just do whatever would
make them the most money or whatever be
the least
work whatever they would find the most
gratifying this is the way
universities are operated our part of
the world and as a result obviously
even the best universities are producing
people
with the wrong credentials and in many
cases they're producing people with
with hollow credentials we did a lot of
research
in the last two years about
business schools and about credentials
very closely linked to
the stock market i'm using this wording
because there's more than one term for
this
becoming a stock broker in plain english
which can fall under several different
headings not necessarily the study of
economics
not necessarily the study of business
i'm somebody with a background
in buddhist research i studied korean
ojibwe
first nations languages i have studied
some things that are very obscure and
marginal and that nobody makes money
out of studying right so when i turn my
attention to something relatively
mainstream
and with a lot of money involved i think
oh okay so the defects and problems of
academic organization i'm not going to
find them at all over here now right
now we're talking about business school
now we're talking about the stock market
and i find exactly the same tragic
problems of organization i can see that
these are these are institutions that do
not work
for the service of the students they do
not work for the service of society they
do not function in a democratic matter
at all they work in the interests of a
power elite at the top
those people may not perceive themselves
as an elite
party those people may not perceive
themselves
as an aristocracy the students may not
perceive them as and may not resent them
as
some kind of oppressive elite right but
nevertheless
in the function of the institution with
time that is indeed what they are and
you can tell
by the outcomes all right uh
when you look at the progress of society
in thailand contrasted to
laos still a communist dictatorship to
this day
contrasted to cambodia formerly a
communist dictatorship now just a
corrupt
capitalist dictatorship contrasted to
myanmar
history of which i've already summarized
this video okay
what was the advantage that thailand
had for all those years and there are a
lot of disadvantages with thailand
including
a terrible university education system
by the way
you know um it's not the case
that government is merely as good
as the people who happen to participate
in it
it's not the case that a despotism is as
good as the 10 or 20 guys at the top
making the policy and doing the research
and making the decisions
nor that a democracy is as good as the 3
000 people
who are really participating in many
cases it may only be a few thousand
or the thirty thousand or the three
hundred thousand or the three million
however many millions it's not the case
that democracy is as good as
those participants right because what
you have in democracy
is a much greater capacity for doubt
for questions and challenges to be
raised
right for government to recognize
problems problems with what it's doing
problems deciding for the whole of
society's
curiosity to be canvassed to be
harnessed to be engaged in the question
of
how is this university supposed to work
what is this supposed to be
and for people to voice the opinion this
is intolerable
it's intolerable to spend a hundred
thousand dollars a year
and get nothing in return or in myanmar
in the humble village where people would
say
it's intolerable that the next town over
has electricity and we don't
on this simple level you know yes
um having procedures
in government that allow and instigate
and encourage dissent that give
everyone the opportunity to doubt
and question and make proposals and
examine what's wrong with society
right that is an advantage that with the
passage of time
explains the remarkable contrast
between the communist countries of
eastern europe
and the democracies in some cases were
physically on the map
culturally and linguistically right next
door to them
it explains the vibrancy of thailand as
a society today
in contrast to laos next door it
explains
the depth of the difference that we see
now between north korea
and south korea two countries that
linguistically
and culturally were completely
homogeneous
before they took separate paths one
democratic
the other despotic